<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>This Introduction was published in the Swiss newspapers in December, 1917, with an episode of the novel and a note explaining the original title, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">L’Un contre Tous</i>. “This somewhat ironical name was suggested⁠—with a difference⁠—by La Boëtie’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Le Contr’ Un</i>; but it must not be supposed that the author entertained the extravagant idea of setting one man in opposition to all others; he only wishes to summon the personal conscience to the most urgent conflict of our time, the struggle against the herd-spirit.” <a href="introduction.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Leopardi. <a href="part-4.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="endnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“Simon and I then understood our hatred of strangers and barbarians, and our egotism, in which we included ourselves and our entire small moral family.⁠—<q>The first care of him who would wish to live must be to surround himself with high walls; but even in his closed garden he must introduce only those who are guided by the same feelings, and interests analogous to his own</q>.”</p>
						<cite>—⁠<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Free Man</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>In three lines, three times, this “free man” expresses the idea of “shutting-up,” “closing,” and “surrounding with walls.” <a href="part-5.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>Reference to ʻAbduʻl-Bahá, at present the head of the Babists or Bahaists. He was at that time a prisoner at <abbr>St.</abbr> Jean d’Acre. See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lessons of <abbr>St.</abbr> Jean d’Acre</i>, by ʻAbduʻl-Bahá, collected by Laura Clifford Barney. <a href="part-5.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“It is from the North that our light comes today” <cite>—⁠Translator</cite></p>
					<p>A famous line of Voltaire’s. <cite>—⁠Author</cite> <a href="part-5.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="endnote">
					<p>“Whose suffering will endure to the world’s end.” <cite>—⁠Translator</cite></p>
					<p>The quotation is from Pascal. <cite>—⁠Author</cite> <a href="part-5.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
