<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Part V</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-5" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<h2>
					<span epub:type="label">Part</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">V</span>
				</h2>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>They also serve who only stand and wait.</p>
					<cite>Milton</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<section id="part-5-1">
				<p>Once more Clerambault found himself wrapt in solitude; but this time she appeared to him as never before, calm and beautiful, kindness shining from her face, with eyes full of affection and soft cool hands which she laid on his fevered forehead. He knew that now she had chosen him for her own.</p>
				<p>It is not given to every man to be alone; many groan under it, but with a secret pride. It is the complaint of the ages; and proves, without those who complain being aware of it, that solitude has not marked them for her own; that they are not her familiars. They have passed the outer door, and are cooling their heels in the vestibule; but they have not had patience to wait their turn to go in, or else their recriminations have kept them at a distance.</p>
				<p>No one can penetrate to the heart of friendly solitude unless they have the gift of God’s grace, or have gained the benefit of trials bravely accepted. Outside the door you must leave the dust of the road, the harsh voices and mean thoughts of the world, egotism, vanity, miserable rebellions against disappointments in love or ambition.⁠—It must be that, like the pure Orphic shades whose golden tablets have transmitted to us their dying voices, “<q>The soul flees from the circle of pain</q>” and presents itself alone and bare “<q>to the chill fountain which flows from the lake of Memory</q>.”</p>
				<p>This is the miracle of the resurrection; he who has cast off his mortal coil and thinks that he has lost everything, finds that he is only just entering on his true life. Not only are others as well as himself restored to him, but he sees that up to now he has never really possessed them. Outside in the throng, how can he see over the heads of those who press about him? And it is not possible for him to look long into the eyes of those who influence him, even though they are his dearest, for they are pressed too close against him. There is no time; no perspective. We feel only that our bodies are crushed together, closely entwined by our common destiny, and tossed on the muddy torrent of multitudinous existence. Clerambault felt that he had not seen his son in any real sense until after his death; and the brief hour in which he and Rosine had recognised each other was one in which the bonds of a baleful delusion had been broken by the force of suffering.</p>
				<p>Now that by means of successive eliminations, he had arrived at solitude, he felt withdrawn from the passions of the living, but they stood out all the more to him in a kind of lucid intimacy. All, not only his wife and children, but the millions of beings whom he had thought to embrace in an oratorical affection; they all painted themselves on the dark background. On the sombre river of destiny which sweeps humanity away, and which he had confounded with it, appeared millions of struggling living fragments⁠—men; and each had his own personality, each was a whole world of joy and sorrow, dreams and efforts and each was I. I bend over him and it is myself I see; “I,” say the eyes, and the heart repeats “I.” My brothers, at last I understand you, for your faults are also mine, even to the fury with which you pursue me; I recognise that also, for it is once more I.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="part-5-2">
				<p>From this time onward Clerambault began to see men, not with the eyes in his head, but with his heart;⁠—no longer with ideas of pacifism, or Tolstoyism (another folly), but by seizing the thoughts of his fellows and putting himself in their place. He began to discover afresh the people around him, even those who had been most hostile to him, the intellectuals, and the politicians; and he saw plainly their wrinkles, their white hair, the bitter lines about their mouths, their bent backs, their shaky legs.⁠ ⁠… Overwrought, nervous, ready to break down,⁠ ⁠… how much they had aged in six months! The excitement of the fight had kept them up at first; but as it went on and, no matter what the issue, the ruin became plain; each one had his griefs, and each feared to lose the little⁠—but that little, infinitely precious⁠—remained to him. They tried to hide their agony, and clenched their teeth, but all suffered. Doubt had begun to undermine the most confident, “Hush, not a word! it will kill me if you speak of it.”⁠ ⁠… Clerambault, full of pity, thought of Madame Mairet; he must hold his tongue in future;⁠—but it was too late, they all knew now what he thought, and he was a living negation and remorse to them. Many hated him, but Clerambault no longer resented it; he was almost ready to help them to restore their lost illusions.</p>
				<p>These souls were full of a passionate faith which they felt to be threatened; and this lent them a quality of tragic, pitiable greatness. With the politicians this was complicated by the absurd trappings of theatrical declamation; with the intellectuals by the obstinacy of mania; but in spite of all, the wounds were visible, you could hear the cry of the heart that clings to belief, that calls for an heroic delusion.</p>
				<p>This faith was very touching in some young and simple people; no declamations, no pretensions to knowledge; only the desperate clinging of a devotion which has given all, and in return asks for one word only: “It is true⁠ ⁠… Thou, my beloved, my Country, power divine, still livest, to whom I have offered up my life, and all that I loved!”⁠—One could kneel before those poor little black gowns, before those mothers, wives and sisters; one longed to kiss the thin hands that trembled with the hope and fear of the hereafter, and say: “Mourn not⁠—for ye shall be comforted.”</p>
				<p>What consolation can one offer, when one does not believe in the ideal for which they lived, and which is killing them?⁠—The long-sought answer finally came to Clerambault, almost unconsciously: “You must care for men more than for illusion, or even for truth.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="part-5-3">
				<p>Clerambault’s warm feelings were not reciprocated; and he was more attacked than ever, though for some months he had published nothing. In the autumn of 1917 the anger against him had risen to an unheard-of height. The disproportion was really laughable between this rage and the feeble words of one man, but it was so all over the world. A dozen or so weak pacifists, alone, surrounded, without means of being heard through any paper of standing, spoke honestly but not loudly, and this let loose a perfect frenzy of insults and threats. At the slightest contradiction the monster Opinion fell into an epileptic fit.</p>
				<p>The prudent Perrotin who, as a rule, was surprised at nothing, kept quiet, and let Clerambault ruin himself his own way; but even he was alarmed by this explosion of tyrannical stupidity. In history and at a distance it could be laughed at; but close at hand it looked as if the human brain was about to give way. Why is it that in this war men lost their mental balance more than in any other at any previous time? Has the war been really more atrocious? That is either childish nonsense, or a deliberate forgetfulness of what has happened in our own day, under our eyes; in Armenia, in the Balkans; during the repression of the Commune, in colonial wars under new conquistadors in China and the Congo.⁠ ⁠… Of all animals we know, the human beast has always been the most ferocious. Then is it because men had more faith in the war of today? Surely not. The western peoples had reached the point of evolution when war seemed so absurd that we could no longer practise it and preserve our reason.</p>
				<p>We are obliged to intoxicate ourselves, to go crazy, unless we would die the despairing death of darkest pessimism; and that is why the voice of one sane man threw into fits of rage all the others who wanted to forget; they were afraid that this voice would wake them up, and that they would find themselves sobered, disgraced, and without a rag to cover them.</p>
				<p>It was all the worse because at this time the war was going badly and the fine hopes of victory and glory which had been lighted up so many times were beginning to die out. It began to be probable, no matter which way you looked at it, that the war would be a failure for everybody. Neither interest, nor ambition, nor ideals would get anything out of it, and the bitter useless sacrifice, seen at close range, with nothing gained, made men who felt themselves responsible, furious. They were forced either to accuse themselves or throw the blame on others, and the choice was quickly made. The disaster was attributed to all those who had foreseen the defeat and tried to prevent it. Every retreat of the army, every diplomatic blunder found an excuse in the machinations of the pacifists, and these unpopular gentry to whom no one listened were invested by their opponents with the formidable power of organising defeat. In order that none should be ignorant of this, a writing was hung about their necks with the word “Defeatist,” like their brother-heretics of the good old days; all that remained was to burn them, and if the executioner was not at hand there were at least plenty of assistants.</p>
				<p>At first, by way of getting their hand in, the authorities picked out inoffensive people⁠—women, teachers, anyone who was little known and unable to defend himself; and then they turned their attention to something bigger. It was a good chance for a politician to rid himself of a dangerous rival, of anyone possessed of secrets or likely to rise in the future. Above all, according to the old receipts, they took care to mix accusations, throwing into the same bag vulgar sharpers and those whose character and mind made them uneasy, so that in all this mess the blindfolded public did not attempt to distinguish between an honest man and a scamp. In this way those who were not sufficiently compromised by their actions found themselves involved in those of their associates; and if these were lacking, the authorities stood ready, if necessary, to supply them made to order to fit the accusation.</p>
				<p>When Xavier Thouron first came to see Clerambault how could anyone know if he was in the Secret Service? He might very well have come of his own accord; and it was impossible to say what his intentions were, perhaps he hardly knew himself? In the purlieus of a great city there are always unscrupulous adventurers rushing about seeking whom they may devour. They have ravenous appetites, and curiosity to match, and anything will do to fill up this aching void. They are willing to say black is white; all is grist that comes to their mill, and they are capable of throwing you into the water one minute and jumping in to save you the next. They are not too careful of their skins, but the animal inside has to be fed and amused. If he stopped making faces and stuffing for one moment, he might die of boredom and disgust at his own vacancy; but he is too clever for that, he will not stop to think until he dies⁠—splendidly, on his feet, like the Roman Emperor.</p>
				<p>No one could have told Thouron’s real object when he went for the first time to Clerambault’s house. As usual he was very busy, excited and on the scent of he knew not what. He was one of those great journalists⁠—they are rare in the profession⁠—who, without taking the trouble to read a thing, can give you a vivid, brilliant account of it, which often, by a miracle, proves to be fairly just. He said his little “piece” to Clerambault without too many mistakes, and appeared to believe it; perhaps he did while the words were on his lips. Why not? He was a sort of pacifist himself from time to time; it depended on the direction of the wind, or the attitude of certain of his brother-writers whom he sometimes followed, and occasionally opposed. Clerambault could never cure himself of a childlike trust in anyone who came to him, and he allowed himself to be touched;⁠—besides, the press of his country had not spoiled him of late, so he poured out the inmost thoughts of his heart, while Thouron took it all in with the deepest interest.</p>
				<p>An acquaintance thus closely formed could not, of course, stop there; letters were exchanged, in which one spoke, and the other led him on. Thouron persuaded Clerambault to put his ideas in the form of little popular pamphlets, which he undertook to distribute among the working classes. Clerambault hesitated, and refused at first. The partisans of the reigning order and injustice pretend hypocritically to disapprove of the secret propaganda of a new truth; Clerambault saw no harm in it, when no other way was possible. (All persecuted faiths have their catacombs.) But he did not feel himself suited to such a course of action. It was more his part to say what he thought and take the consequences, and he felt sure that the word would spread of itself, without his hawking it about. He would have blushed to admit it, but perhaps a secret instinct held him back from the offers of service made him by this eager “drummer.” But he could not altogether restrain his zeal. Thouron published in his paper a sort of Apologia for Clerambault. He told of his visits, and their conversations; and he explained and paraphrased the thoughts of the poet. Clerambault was astonished when he read them, he hardly knew his own ideas again, but nevertheless, he could not altogether deny them, for, buried among Thouron’s commentaries, he found literal and accurate quotations from his letters. These, however, were even more confusing; the same words and phrases, grafted on other contexts, took on an accent and a colour that he had not given them. Add that the censor, in his zeal for the safety of the country, had tampered with the quotations, cutting out here and there a word, half a line, or the end of a paragraph⁠—all perfectly innocent, but this suppression suggested the worst iniquities to the overexcited mind of the reader. All this was like oil on the flame, and the effect was soon felt. Clerambault did not know which way to turn to keep his champion quiet; and yet he could not be angry with him, for Thouron had his share of threats and insults; but he was used to things of this kind, and they fell from him, like water off a duck’s back.</p>
				<p>After this common experience Thouron claimed special rights over Clerambault; and having tried without success to make him buy shares in his newspaper, he put him on the list of honourary members, without his knowledge, and thought it very strange that Clerambault was not delighted when he found it out a few weeks later. Their relations were slightly cooled by this incident, but Thouron continued to parade the name of his “distinguished friend” from time to time in his articles. The latter let this go on, thinking himself fortunate to get off so easily. He had rather lost sight of him, when he heard one day that Thouron had been arrested. He was implicated in a rather shabby money affair which was as usual ascribed to plots of the enemy. The Courts following the lead of those “higher-up” could not fail to find a connection between these shady transactions and Thouron’s so-called pacifism. This had showed itself in his paper, in an irregular incoherent way, subject to attacks of “Exterminism,” but none the less it was all supposed to be part of the great “defeatist” scheme, and the examination of his correspondence allowed the authorities to drag in anyone they chose. As he had carefully kept every letter, from men of all shades of opinion, there were plenty to choose from and they soon found what they wanted.</p>
				<p>It was only through the papers that Clerambault heard that he was on the list, and they breathed a triumphant: “At last we have got him.”⁠ ⁠… All was now clear, for if a man thinks differently from the rest of the world, is it not plain as daylight that there must be some low motive underneath it all? Seek and you will find⁠ ⁠… They had found, and without going further, one Paris newspaper announced the “treason” of Clerambault. There was no trace of this in the indictment; but justice does not feel that it is her business to correct people’s mistakes. Clerambault was summoned before the magistrate, and begged in vain to be told of what offence he was accused. The judge was polite, showing him the consideration due to a man of his notoriety, but, seemed in no haste to dismiss the case; it almost looked as if he was waiting for something⁠ ⁠… for what? Why for the crime, of course!</p>
			</section>
			<section id="part-5-4">
				<p>Madame Clerambault had not the temper of a Roman matron, nor even of that high-spirited Jewess in the celebrated affair which cut France in two some twenty years ago, who clung more closely to her husband on account of the public injustice. She had the timid instinctive respect of the French bourgeoisie for the official verdict. Though she knew that there were no grounds for the accusation against Clerambault, she felt that it was a disgrace to be accused, which also affected her, and this she could not bear in silence. Unfortunately, in replying to her reproaches, Clerambault took the worst possible line, without meaning it, for instead of trying to defend himself, he only said:</p>
				<p>“My poor wife, it is awfully hard on you⁠ ⁠… Yes, you are right,” and then waited till the shower was over. But this tone upset Madame Clerambault, who was furious because she felt she had no hold on her husband. She knew perfectly that though he appeared to agree with her she could not turn him from his course of action. Despairing of success, she went off to pour her troubles into the ears of her brother. Leo Camus made no attempt to disguise his opinion that the best thing she could do was to get a divorce, which he represented to her as a duty. This, however, was going a little too far; she was, after all, a respectable bourgeoise, and the traditional horror of divorce reawakened her profound fidelity and made her think the remedy worse than the disease; so they remained united on the surface, but intimacy between them was gone.</p>
				<p>Rosine was out nearly all day, for in order to forget her unhappiness she was taking a course in trained nursing, and she passed a large part of her time away from home. Even when she was at home her thoughts seemed far away, and Clerambault had never regained his former place in his daughter’s heart; another filled it now⁠—Daniel. She treated her father coldly; he was the cause of her separation from the man of her heart, and this was a way of punishing him. And though she was too just not to reproach herself, still she could not alter; injustice is sometimes a consolation.</p>
				<p>Daniel had not forgotten, any more than Rosine; he was not proud of his conduct, but it rather softened his remorse to throw the blame on his surroundings, on the tyrannical opinion which had coerced him; but in his heart he was discontented with himself.</p>
				<p>Accident came to the assistance of this sulking pair of lovers. Daniel was seriously but not dangerously wounded, and was evacuated back to Paris. During his convalescence he was walking one day near the square of the Bon Marché when he saw Rosine. He stood still a moment but as she came forward, without hesitation, they went on into the Square and began a long conversation, which, beginning by embarrassment, and interrupted by numerous reproaches and avowals, led finally to a perfect understanding between them. They were so absorbed in their tender explanations, that they did not see Madame Clerambault when she came near, and the good lady, overcome by this unexpected meeting, hurried home to tell the news to her husband. In spite of their estrangement, she could not keep this to herself. He listened to her indignant recital, for she could not bear that her daughter should have anything to do with a man whose family had affronted them; and when she had finished he said nothing at first, according to his present habit, until at last he shook his head smiling, and said:</p>
				<p>“Good enough.”</p>
				<p>Madame Clerambault stopped short, shrugged her shoulders, turned to go, but with her hand on the door of her room she looked back and said:</p>
				<p>“These people insulted you; Rosine and you agreed to have nothing more to do with them, and now, <em>your daughter</em> is making advances to this man who has refused her, and you say it is ‘good enough.’ I can’t understand you any longer, you must be out of your mind.”</p>
				<p>Clerambault tried to show her that his daughter’s happiness did not consist in agreement with his ideas, and that Rosine was quite right to get rid of the consequences of his foolishness where they affected herself.</p>
				<p>“Your foolishness⁠ ⁠… that is the first word of sense that you have said in years.”</p>
				<p>“You see yourself that I am right,” said he, and made her promise to let Rosine arrange her romance as she pleased.</p>
				<p>The girl was radiant when she came in, but she said nothing of what had passed. Madame Clerambault held her tongue with great difficulty, and the father saw with tender amusement the happiness that shone once more on the face of his child. He did not know exactly what had happened, but he guessed that Rosine had thrown him and his ideas overboard⁠—sweetly of course, but still⁠—the lovers had made it up at their parents’ expense, and both had blamed with admirable justice the old people’s exaggerations on either side. The years in the trenches had emancipated Daniel from the narrow fanaticism of his family, without impairing his patriotism, and Rosine in exchange had gently admitted that her father had been mistaken. They agreed with little difficulty, for she was naturally calm and fatalistic, which suited perfectly with Daniel’s stoical acceptance of things as they were. They had decided, therefore, to go through life together, without paying any more attention to the disagreements of those who had come before them, as the saying is⁠—though it would be more exact to say, those whom they were leaving behind them. The future also troubled them little; like millions of other human beings they only asked their share of happiness at the moment and shut their eyes to everything else.</p>
				<p>Madame Clerambault was annoyed that her daughter said nothing of the events of the morning, and soon went out again; Rosine and her father sat dreamily, he by the window, smoking, and she with an unread magazine before her. She looked absently about the room, with happy eyes, trying to recall the details of the scene between her and Daniel; her glance fell on her father’s weary face, and its melancholy expression struck her sharply. She got up, and standing behind him, laid her hand on his shoulder and said, with a little sigh of compassion that tried to conceal her inward joy:</p>
				<p>“Poor little Papa!”</p>
				<p>Clerambault looked at Rosine, whose eyes, in spite of herself, shone with happiness:</p>
				<p>“And my little girl is not ‘poor’ any longer, is she?”</p>
				<p>Rosine blushed: “Why do you say that?” she asked.</p>
				<p>Clerambault only shook his head at her, and she leaned forward laying her cheek against his:</p>
				<p>“She is no longer poor,” he repeated.</p>
				<p>“No,” she whispered, “she is very, very rich.”</p>
				<p>“Tell me about this fortune of hers?”</p>
				<p>“She has⁠—first of all⁠—her dear Papa.”</p>
				<p>“Oh, you little fraud!” said Clerambault, trying to move so that he could see her face, but Rosine put her hands over his eyes:</p>
				<p>“No, I don’t want you to look at me, or say anything to me.⁠ ⁠…” She kissed him again, and said caressingly:</p>
				<p>“Poor dear little Papa.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="part-5-5">
				<p>Rosine had now escaped from the cares that weighed on the house, and it was not long before she flew away from the nest altogether, for she had passed her examinations and was sent to a hospital in the South. Both the Clerambaults felt painfully the loss to their empty fireside.</p>
				<p>But the man was not the more lonely of the two. He knew this and was sincerely sorry for his wife, who had not either the strength of mind to follow his path, nor to leave him. As for him he felt that now, no matter what happened, he would never be bereft of sympathy; persecution would arouse it, and lead the most reserved people to express their feeling. A very precious evidence of this came to him at this time.</p>
				<p>One day, when he was alone in the apartment, the bell rang and he went to open the door. A lady was there whom he did not know; she held out a letter, mentioning her name as she did so; in the dim light of the vestibule, she had taken him for the servant, but at once saw her mistake, as he tried to persuade her to come in. “No,” said she, “I am only a messenger,” and she went away; but when she had gone he found a little bunch of violets that she had laid on a table near the door. The letter was as follows:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<p>“<i><span>Tu ne cede malis,</span><br/>
					<span class="i1">sed contra audentior ito.</span></i>⁠ ⁠…</p>
					<p>“You fight for us, and our hearts are with you. Pour out your troubles to us, and I will give you my hope, my strength, and my love. I am one who can act only through you.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>The youthful ardour of these last mysterious words, touched and puzzled Clerambault. He tried to remember the lady as she stood on his threshold; she was not very young; fine features, grave dark eyes in a worn face. Where had he seen her before? The fugitive impression faded as he tried to hold it.</p>
				<p>He saw her again two or three days later, not far from him in the Luxembourg Gardens. She walked on and as he crossed the path to meet her she stopped and waited for him. He thanked her, and asked why she had gone away so quickly the other day, without saying who she was. And as he spoke it came to him that he had known her for a long time. He used to see her formerly in the Luxembourg, or in the neighbouring streets, with a tall boy who must have been her son. Every time they passed each other their eyes used to meet with a half-smile of respectful recognition. And though he did not know their name, and they had never exchanged a word, they were to him part of those friendly shadows which throng about our daily life, not always noticed when they are there, but which leave a gap when they disappear.</p>
				<p>At once his thought leaped from the woman before him to the young companion whom he missed from her side. In these days of mourning you could never tell who might be still in the land of the living, but he cried impulsively:</p>
				<p>“It was your son who wrote to me?”</p>
				<p>“Yes,” said she, “he is a great admirer of yours. We have both felt drawn to you for a long time.”</p>
				<p>“He must come to see me.”</p>
				<p>“He cannot do that.”</p>
				<p>“Why not? Is he at the Front?”</p>
				<p>“No, he is here.” After a moment’s silence, Clerambault asked:</p>
				<p>“Has he been wounded?”</p>
				<p>“Would you like to see him?” said the mother. Clerambault walked beside her in silence, not daring to ask any questions, but at last he said: “You are fortunate at least that you can have him near you always.⁠ ⁠…” She understood and held out her hand: “We were always very close to one another,” she said, and Clerambault repeated:</p>
				<p>“At least he is near you.”</p>
				<p>“I have his soul,” she answered.</p>
				<p>They had now reached the house, an old seventeenth century dwelling in one of the narrow ancient streets between the Luxembourg and <abbr>St.</abbr> Sulpice, where the pride of old France still subsists in retirement. The great door was shut even at this hour. Madame Froment passed in ahead of Clerambault, went up two or three steps at the back of a paved court, and entered the apartment on the ground floor.</p>
				<p>“Dear Edmé,” said she, as she opened the door of the room, “I have a surprise for you, guess what it is.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="part-5-6">
				<p>Clerambault saw a young man looking at him as he lay extended on a couch. The fair youthful face lit up by the setting sun, with its intelligent eyes, looked so healthy and calm that at first sight the thought of illness did not present itself.</p>
				<p>“You!” he exclaimed. “You here?”</p>
				<p>He looked younger than ever with this joyful surprise on his face, but neither the body, nor the arms which were covered, moved in the least, and Clerambault coming nearer saw that the head alone seemed to be alive.</p>
				<p>“Mamma, you have been giving me away,” said Edmé Froment.</p>
				<p>“Did you not want to see me?” said Clerambault, bending over him.</p>
				<p>“That is not just what I meant, but I am not very anxious to be seen.”</p>
				<p>“Why not? I should like to know,” said Clerambault, in a tone which he tried to make gay.</p>
				<p>“Because a man does not ask visitors to the house when he is not there himself.”</p>
				<p>“Where are you?” if one may ask.</p>
				<p>“I could almost swear that I was shut up in an old Egyptian mummy”⁠—he glanced at the bed and his immovable body:</p>
				<p>“There is no life left in it,” he said.</p>
				<p>“You have more life than any of us,” said a voice beside them. Clerambault looked up and saw on the other side of the couch a tall young man full of health and strength, who seemed to be about the same age as Edmé, who smiled and said to Clerambault: “My friend Chastenay has enough vitality to lend me some and to spare.”</p>
				<p>“If that were only literally true,” said the other, and the two friends exchanged an affectionate glance. Chastenay continued:</p>
				<p>“I should in that case only be giving back a part of what I owe you.” Then turning to Clerambault, he added: “He is the one who keeps us all up, is it not so, Madame Fanny?”</p>
				<p>“Indeed yes, I could not do without my strong son,” said the mother tenderly.</p>
				<p>“They take advantage of the fact that I cannot defend myself,” said Edmé to Clerambault. “You see I cannot stir an inch.”</p>
				<p>“Was it a wound?”</p>
				<p>“Paralysis.”⁠—Clerambault did not dare to ask for details, but after a pause: “Do you suffer much?” he inquired.</p>
				<p>“I ought to wish that it were so perhaps; for pain is a tie between us and the shore. However, I confess that I prefer the silence of this body in which I am encased⁠ ⁠… let us say no more about it.⁠ ⁠… My mind at least is free. And if it is not true that it ‘<i xml:lang="la">agitat molem</i>,’ does often escape.”</p>
				<p>“I know,” said Clerambault, “it came to see me the other day.”</p>
				<p>“Not for the first time; it has been there before.”</p>
				<p>“And I who thought myself deserted!”</p>
				<p>“Do you recall,” said Edmé, “the words of Randolph to Cecil?⁠—’<q>The voice of a man alone can in one hour put more life into us than the clang of five hundred trumpets sounded continuously</q>.’ ”</p>
				<p>“That always reminds me of you,” said Chastenay, but Edmé went on as if he had not heard him:⁠ ⁠… “You have waked us all up.”</p>
				<p>Clerambault looked at the brave calm eyes of the paralytic, and said:</p>
				<p>“Your eyes do not look as if they needed to be waked.”</p>
				<p>“They do not need it now,” said Edmé, “the farther off one is, the better one sees; but when I was close to everything I saw very little.”</p>
				<p>“Tell me what you see now.”</p>
				<p>“It is getting late,” said Edmé, “and I am rather tired. Will you come another time?”</p>
				<p>“Tomorrow, if you will let me.”</p>
				<p>As Clerambault went out Chastenay joined him. He felt the need of confiding to a heart that could feel the pain and grandeur of the tragedy of which his friend had been at once the hero and the victim. Edmé Froment had been struck on the spinal column by an exploding shell. Young as he was, he was one of the intellectual leaders of his generation, handsome, ardent, eloquent, overflowing with life and visions, loving and beloved, nobly ambitious, and all at once, at a blow⁠—a living death! His mother who had centred all her pride and love on him now saw him condemned for the rest of his days to this terrible fate. They had both suffered terribly, but each hid it from the other, and this effort kept them up. They took great pride in each other. She had all the care of him, washed and fed him like a little child, and he kept calm for her sake, and sustained her on the wings of his spirit.</p>
				<p>“Ah,” said Chastenay, “it makes one feel ashamed⁠—when I think that I am alive and well, that I can reach out my arms to life, that I can run and leap, and draw this blessed air into my lungs.⁠ ⁠…” As he spoke he stretched out his arms, raised his head, and breathed deeply.</p>
				<p>“I ought to feel remorseful,” he added, lowering his voice, “and the worst is that I do not.” Clerambault could not help smiling.</p>
				<p>“It is not very heroic,” continued Chastenay, “and yet I care more for Froment than for anyone on earth, and his fate makes me wretchedly unhappy. But all the same, when I think of my luck to be here at this moment when so many are gone, and to be well and sound, I can hardly keep from showing how glad I am. It is so good to live and be whole. Poor Edmé!⁠ ⁠… You must think me terribly selfish?”</p>
				<p>“No, what you say is perfectly natural and healthy. If we were all as sincere as you, humanity would not be the victim of the wicked notion of glory in suffering. You have every right to enjoy life after the trials you have passed through,” and as he spoke he touched the Croix de Guerre which the young man wore on his breast.</p>
				<p>“I have been through them and I am going back,” said Chastenay, “but there is no merit in that; there is nothing else that I can do. I am not trying to deceive you and pretend that I love to smell powder; you cannot go through three years of war, and still want to run risks and be indifferent to danger, even if you did feel like that in the beginning. I was so⁠—I may frankly say I did go in for heroism; but I have lost all that, it was really part ignorance and part rhetoric, and when one is rid of these, the nonsense of the war, the idiotic slaughter, the ugliness, the horrible useless sacrifice must be clear to the narrowest mind. If it is not manly to fly from the inevitable, it is not necessary either to go in search of what can be avoided. The great Corneille was a hero behind the lines; those whom I have known at the front were almost heroes in spite of themselves.”</p>
				<p>“That is the true heroism,” said Clerambault.</p>
				<p>“That is Froment’s kind,” said Chastenay. “He is a hero because there is nothing else that he can be, not even a man; but the dearest thing about him is, that in spite of everything, he is a real man.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="part-5-7">
				<p>The truth of this remark was abundantly evident to Clerambault in a long conversation that he had with Froment the next day. If the courage of the young man did not desert him in the ruin of his life, it was all the more to his credit, as he had never professed to be an apostle of self-abnegation. He had had great hopes and robust ambitions, fully justified by his talents and vigorous youth, but unlike his friend Chastenay, he had never for a moment cherished any illusions as to the war.</p>
				<p>The disastrous folly of it had been clear to him at once, and this he owed not only to his own penetrating mind, but to that inspiring angel who, from his earliest infancy, had woven the soul of her son from her own pure spirit.</p>
				<p>Whenever Clerambault went to see Edmé, Madame Froment was almost always there; but she kept in the background, sitting at the window with her work, only stopping occasionally to throw a tender glance at her son. She was not a woman of exceptional cleverness, but she had what may be called the intelligence of the heart, and her mind had been cultivated by the influence of her husband⁠—a distinguished physician much older than herself. Thus it had happened that her whole life had been filled by these two profound feelings, an almost filial love for her husband and a more passionate sentiment for her son.</p>
				<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Froment, a cultivated man with much originality of mind which he concealed under a grave courtesy, as if he feared to wound others by his distinction, had travelled all over Europe, as well as in Egypt, Persia, and India. He had been a student of science and of religion, and his special interest had been the new forms of faith appearing in the world; such as Babism, Christian Science, and theosophical doctrines. As he had kept in touch with the pacifist movement, and was a friend of Baroness Suttner, whom he had known in Vienna, he had long seen the catastrophe approaching which threatened him and all he loved. But man of courage as he was, and accustomed to the indifference of nature, he had not tried to delude his family as to the future, but had rather sought to strengthen their souls to meet the danger that hung over their heads.</p>
				<p>More than all his words, his example was sacred to his wife, for the son had been yet a child at the time of his father’s death. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Froment had suffered from a cancer of the intestines, and during the whole course of the slow and painful disease he had followed his ordinary occupations up to the last minute, sustaining the courage of his loved ones by this serene fortitude.</p>
				<p>This noble picture which dwelt in Madame Froment’s heart, and which she worshipped in secret, was to her what religion is to other women. To this, though she had no clear belief in the future life, she prayed, especially in difficult moments, as if to an ever-present helpful friend. And by a singular phenomenon sometimes observed after death, the essence of her husband’s soul seemed to have passed into hers. For this reason her son had grown up in an atmosphere of placid thought, while most of the young generation before 1914 were feverish, restless, aggressive, irritated by delay. When the war broke out, there was no need for Madame Froment to protect herself or her son against the national excesses; they were both strangers to such ideas; but they made no attempt to resist the inevitable; they had watched the coming of this misfortune for so long! All that they could do now was to bear it bravely, while trying to preserve what was the most precious thing to them; their souls’ faith. Madame Froment did not consider it necessary to be “<i xml:lang="fr">Au-dessus de la mêlée</i>” in order to lead it; and she accomplished in her limited sphere simply, but more efficaciously, what was attempted by writers in Germany and England⁠—a form of international reconciliation. She had kept in touch with many old friends, and without being troubled in circles infected by the war-spirit, or ever undertaking useless demonstrations against the war, she was a check on insane manifestations of hatred, by her simple presence, her quiet words and manner, her good judgment, and the respect inspired by her kindness. In families that were sympathetic she distributed messages from liberal Europeans, among others, Clerambault’s articles, though without his knowledge. It was a source of satisfaction when she saw that their hearts were touched. A greater joy still was to see that her son himself was transformed.</p>
				<p>Edmé Froment was not in the least a Tolstoyan pacifist. At first he thought the war more a folly than a crime, and if he had been free, he would have withdrawn, like Perrotin, into high dilettantism of art and thought, without attempting the hopeless task of fighting the prevailing opinion, for which he then felt more contempt than pity. Since his forced participation in the war, he had been obliged to acknowledge that this folly was so largely expiated by suffering that it would be superfluous to add anything to it. Man had made his own hell upon earth, and there was no need of further condemnation. He was on leave, at Paris, when he came across Clerambault’s articles which showed him that there was something better for him to do than to set himself up as a judge of his companions in misery; that it would be far nobler to try to deliver them while taking his share of the common burden.</p>
				<p>The young disciple was disposed to go farther than his master. Clerambault, who was naturally affectionate and rather weak, found his joy in communion with other men, and suffered even when divided in spirit from their errors. He was a confirmed self-doubter. He was prone to look in the eyes of the crowd for agreement with his ideas. He exhausted himself in futile efforts to reconcile his inward beliefs with the aspirations and the social struggles of his time. Froment, who had the soul of a chieftain in a helpless body, dauntlessly maintained that for him who bears the torch of a lofty ideal it is an absolute duty to hold it high over the heads of his comrades; that it would be wrong to confuse it in the other illuminations. The commonplace of democracies that Voltaire had less wit than <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Everybody is nonsense.⁠ ⁠… “<i xml:lang="la">Democritus ait; Unus mihi pro populo est.</i>⁠ ⁠… To me an individual is as good as a thousand.”⁠ ⁠… Our modern faith sees in the social group the summit of human evolution, but where is the proof? Froment thought the greatest height was reached in an individual superiority. Millions of men have lived and died to produce one perfect flower of thought, for such are the superb and prodigal ways of nature. She spends whole peoples to make a Jesus, a Buddha, an Aeschylus, a Vinci, a Newton, or a Beethoven; but without these men, what would the people have been? Or humanity itself? We do not hold with the egotist ideal of the Superman. A man who is great is great for all his fellows; his individuality expresses and often guides millions of others; it is the incarnation of their secret forces, of their highest desires; it concentrates and realises them. The sole fact that a man was Christ, has exalted and lifted generations of humanity, filling them with the divine energy; and though nineteen centuries have since passed, millions have not ceased to aspire to the height of this example, though none has attained to it.</p>
				<p>Thus understood, the ideal individualist is more productive for human society than the ideal communist, who would lead us to the mechanical perfection of the beehive, and at the very least he is indispensable as corrective and complement.</p>
				<p>This proud individualism, stated by Froment with burning eloquence, was a support to Clerambault’s mind, prone to waver, and undecided from good-nature, self-distrust, and the wish to understand others.</p>
				<p>Froment rendered Clerambault another important service. More in the current of world-thought, and through his family coming in closer contact with foreign thinkers, an accomplished linguist besides, Froment could bring to mind those other men in all nations who, great in their isolation, fought for the right to a free conscience. It was a consoling spectacle; all the work under the surface of thought suppressed, but struggling towards truth, and the knowledge that the worst tyranny that has crushed the soul of humanity since the Inquisition has failed to stifle the indomitable will to remain free and true.</p>
				<p>No doubt these lofty individualities were rare, but their power was all the greater; the fine outline was more striking, seen against the dark horizon. In the fall of the nations to the foot of the precipice where millions lie in a shapeless mass, their voices seemed to rise with the only human note, and their action gained emphasis from the anger with which it was met. A century ago Chateaubriand wrote:</p>
				<p>“It is vain to struggle longer; henceforward the only important thing is to be.”</p>
				<p>He did not know that “to be” in our time, be oneself, be free, implies the greatest of combats. Those who are true to themselves dominate through the levelling down of the rest.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="part-5-8">
				<p>Clerambault was not the only one to feel the benefit of Froment’s energy, for at his bedside he was sure to find some friend who came, perhaps without admitting it, more to get comfort than to bring it. Two or three of these were young, about Edmé’s age, the others, men over fifty, old friends of the family, or those who had known Froment before the war.</p>
				<p>One of these had been his professor, an old Hellenist, with a sweet absent smile. Then there was a grey-haired sculptor, his face ploughed by deep tragic lines; a country gentleman, clean-shaved, red-cheeked, with the massive head of an old peasant; and finally a doctor. He had a white beard, his face was worn and kind, and you were struck by the strange expression of his eyes; one seemed to look sharply at you, and the other was sad and dreamy.</p>
				<p>There was little resemblance between these men who sometimes met at the invalid’s house. All shades of thought could be found in the group, from the Catholic to the freethinker and the bolshevist⁠—one of Froment’s young friends professed to be of this opinion. In them you could find the traces of the most various intellectual ancestry; the ironic Lucian appeared in the old professor; the Count de Coulanges was wont to solace himself in the evenings on his estate with cattle and fertiliser, but also revelled in the gorgeous texture of Froissart’s style, like cloth of gold, and the countrified, juicy talk of that rascal Gondi⁠—the count certainly had the old French chroniclers in his veins. The sculptor wrinkled his brow in the effort to find metaphysics in Rodin and Beethoven; and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Verrier had a streak of the marvellous in his disposition. This he satisfied by the hypotheses of biology, and the wonders of modern chemistry, though he would glance at the paradise of religion with the disenchanted smile of the man of science. He bore his part in the sad trials of the time, but the era of war with all its gory glory faded for him before the heroic discoveries of thought made by a new Newton, the German Einstein, in the midst of the general distraction.</p>
				<p>These men all differed in the form of their minds and in their temperament; but they all agreed in this, they belonged to no party, each thought for himself, and each respected and loved liberty in himself or in others. What else mattered? In our day, all the old framework is broken down; religious, political, or social. It is but small progress if we call ourselves socialists, or republicans, rather than monarchists, if these castes accept nationalism of State, faith, or class. There are now only two sorts of minds: those shut up behind bars, and those open to all that is alive, to the entire race of man, even our enemies. These men, few though they may be, compose the true “International” which rests on the worship of truth and universal life. They know well that they are each too weak to embrace alone their great ideal, but it is infinite and can embrace them all. United in one object, they push on by their separate ways towards the unknown God.</p>
				<p>These independent spirits were all drawn towards Edmé Froment at this time, because they obscurely saw in him the point where they could meet, the clearing from which every path in the forest is visible. Froment had not always tried to bring others together; as long as he was well and strong, he too had taken his own way, but since his course had been cut short, after a time of bitter despondency of which he said nothing, he had placed himself at the crossroads. As he could not possibly act himself, he was better able to view the whole field and take part in spirit. He saw the different currents: country, revolution, contests between states and classes, science and faith⁠—like a stream’s conflicting forces, with its rapids, whirlpools, and reefs; it may sometimes slacken, or turn its course, but it always flows on irresistibly (even reaction is carried forward). And he, the poor youth staked at his crossroads, took all these currents unto him, the entire stream.</p>
				<p>Edmé reminded Clerambault sometimes of Perrotin, but he and Froment were worlds apart. The latter also denied nothing of what is, and wished to understand everything; but his was a fiery spirit, his whole soul was filled with ordered movement and feeling; with him all life and death went forward and upward. And his body lay there motionless.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="part-5-9">
				<p>It was a dark hour; the turn of the year 1917⁠–⁠18. In the foggy winter nights men waited for the supreme onslaught of the German armies, which rumour had foretold for months past; the Gotha raids on Paris had already begun. Those who wanted to fight to the end pretended confidence, the papers kept on boasting, and Clemenceau had never slept better in his life. But the tension showed in the increasing bitterness of feeling among civilians. The agonised public turned on the suspects among them, the defeatists and the pacifists, and for days at a time the baying of an accusing public pursued these miserable creatures and hunted them down. And spies swarmed of all sorts, patriotic denouncers, half-crazed witnesses. When towards the end of March the long-threatened great offensive against Paris began, the “sacred” fury between fellow-citizens reached its height, and there is no doubt that if the invasion had succeeded, before the Germans had arrived at the gates of the city, the gallows at Vincennes, that altar of the country’s vengeance, would have known many victims, innocent or guilty, accused or condemned.</p>
				<p>Clerambault was often shouted at in the streets, but he was not alarmed; perhaps because he did not realise the danger. One day Moreau found him in a group of people disputing with an excited young man who had spoken to him in a most insulting manner. While they were talking the shell from a Big Bertha exploded close by. Clerambault took no notice, and went on quietly explaining his position to the angry young man. There was something positively comic in this obstinacy, and the circle of listeners was quick to feel it, like true Frenchmen, and began to exchange jokes not entirely of a refined nature, but perfectly good-natured. Moreau caught hold of Clerambault’s arm and tried to drag him away, but he stopped, and looking at the laughing crowd, the absurdity of the situation struck him in his turn, and he too burst out laughing.</p>
				<p>“What an old fool I am!” said he to Moreau, who was still intent on getting him away.</p>
				<p>“You had better look out, for you are not the only fool in this town,” was the somewhat impertinent answer, but Clerambault would not understand what he meant.</p>
				<p>The case against him had entered on a new phase; he was now accused of infraction of the law of the 5th of August, 1914⁠—“An act to repress indiscretions in time of war.” He was accused of pacifist propaganda among the working classes, where it was said that Thouron had distributed Clerambault’s writings with the consent of the author; but there was no foundation for this, as Thouron was in a position to testify that Clerambault had no knowledge of such propaganda, and had certainly not authorised it.</p>
				<p>It appeared, however, singularly enough, that Thouron would not swear to anything of the sort. His attitude was strange, for, instead of stating the facts, he equivocated as if he had something to hide; it almost looked as if he wished this to be noticed, which would have aroused suspicions if he had not been so careful. Unfortunately these suspicions seemed to glance at Clerambault, though he said nothing against him or against anyone; in fact he refused to tell anything, but he let it be understood that if he chose⁠ ⁠… but he did not choose. Clerambault was confronted with him, and his attitude was perfect, really chivalrous. He laid his hand on his heart and declared that be had the admiration of a son for the great “Master,” and “Friend,” and when Clerambault, getting impatient, begged him to state simply just what had passed between them, the other would do nothing but protest his “undying devotion.” He would rather say nothing more; he had nothing to add to his testimony; it was all his fault.</p>
				<p>He left with an increased reputation, while Clerambault was supposed to have sheltered himself behind his devoted henchman. The press unhesitatingly accused Clerambault of cowardice, and meanwhile the case dragged on, Clerambault appearing every day to answer useless questions, with no decision in sight. It might have been supposed that a man accused without proofs, and subject for so long to injurious suspicions, would have been entitled to the sympathy of the public; but on the contrary everyone was more down on him than before; they blamed him because he was not already convicted. All sorts of absurd stories were in circulation about him; it was asserted that experts had discovered through the shape of some letters misprinted in a pamphlet of Clerambault’s that it had come from a German press, and this humbug was readily swallowed by men who were supposed to be intelligent, before the war⁠—only four years ago, but it seemed centuries.</p>
				<p>So all these worthy folks passed sentence on a fellow-citizen on the slightest information; it was not the first time, and it will not be the last. The best opinion was indignant that he should still be at liberty, and reactionary papers, fearing that their prey would escape, tried to intimidate justice by loud accusations, and demanded that the case should be removed from the civil court and brought before a court-martial. This excitement soon developed into one of those paroxysms which in Paris are generally brief but violent; for this sensible people does go crazy periodically. It may be asked why men who are kind for the most part, and naturally given to mutual tolerance, not to say indifference, should have these explosions of furious fanaticism, when they seem to lose all feeling as well as common sense. Some will tell you that this people is feminine in its virtues, as well as in its vices, that the delicate nerves and fine sensibility which cause it to excel in matters of taste and art also make it susceptible to attacks of hysteria, but I am of opinion that any people is manly only by accident, if by a man you mean a reasonable creature⁠—a flattering but baseless idea. Men only use their reason from time to time, and are soon worn out by the effort of thinking; so those do them a favour who act for them, encouraging them in the direction of the least effort, and not much is required to hate a new idea. Do not condemn them; the Friend of all who are persecuted has said with His heroic indulgence: “They know not what they do.”</p>
				<p>An active nationalist newspaper was eager in stirring up the evil instincts that lay below the surface. It lived on the exploitation of hatred and suspicion, which it called “working for the regeneration of France,”⁠—France being reduced to this paper and its friends. It published “Cleramboche,” a collection of sanguinary articles, like those which succeeded so well against Jaurès; it roused people by declaring that the traitor owed his safety to occult influences, and that he would make his escape, if he were not carefully watched; and finally it appealed to popular justice.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="part-5-10">
				<p>Victor Vaucoux hated Clerambault; not that he knew him at all; it is not necessary to know a man in order to hate him; but if he had known him he would have detested him still more. He was his born enemy before he even knew that Clerambault existed. There are races among minds more antagonistic to each other, in all countries, than those divided by a different skin or uniform.</p>
				<p>He was a well-to-do bourgeois from the west of France and belonged to a family of former servants of the Empire who had been sulking for the last forty years in a sterile opposition. He had a small property in the Charente, where he spent the summer, and passed the rest of the time in Paris. Having instincts for government which he could not satisfy, he laid the blame for this on his family and on life, and thus thwarted, his character had grown tyrannical so that he acted the despot unconsciously to those nearest to him, as a right and duty that could not be disputed. The word tolerance had no meaning for him; for <em>he could not make a mistake</em>. Nevertheless he possessed intelligence, and moral vigour; he even had a heart, but all wrapped about and knotted like an old tree-trunk till such forces of expansion as he had within him were stunted. He could absorb nothing from the outside; when he read or travelled he saw everything with hostile eyes, his one wish was to go home; and as the bark was too thick to be penetrated, all his sap came from the foot of the tree⁠—from the <em>dead</em>.</p>
				<p>He was the type of that portion of the race which, stubborn but outworn, has not life enough to spread itself abroad, and shrinks into a sentiment of aggressive self-defence. This looks with suspicion and antipathy on the young forces which overflow around it, at home and abroad; growing nations and classes, all the passionate awkward attempts at social and moral improvement. Like poor Barrès, and his dwarfed hero,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3" id="noteref-3" epub:type="noteref">3</a> such people want walls and barriers, frontiers, and enemies. In this state of siege Vaucoux lived, and his family was forced to live in the same way. His wife who was a sweet, sad, effaced kind of person, found the only method of escape⁠—and died. Left alone with his grief⁠—of which he made a kind of rampart, as of everything about him⁠—having only one son thirteen years of age, he had mounted guard before his youth and brought him up to do the same; strange that a man should bring a son into the world to fight against the future! Perhaps the boy, if let alone, would have found out life by instinct, but in the father’s shut-up house, a sort of jail, he was his father’s prey. They had few friends, few books, few, or rather one, newspaper whose petrified principles corresponded to Vaucoux’ need for conservation, in the corpse-like meaning of the word. As his son, or his victim, could not get away from him, he inoculated him with all his own mental diseases; like those insects which deposit their eggs in the living bodies of others. And when the war broke out, he took him at once to a recruiting station and made him enlist. For a man of his sort, “Country” was the noblest of things⁠—the holy of holies; he did not need to breathe the thrilling suggestion of the crowd, his head was already turned, and, besides, he never went with the crowds; he carried “Country” about with him;⁠—The Country and The Past⁠—The Eternally Past.</p>
				<p>His son was killed, like Clerambault’s son, and the sons of millions of other fathers, for the faith and the ideals of those fathers in which they did not believe.</p>
				<p>Vaucoux had none of Clerambault’s doubts; he did not know the meaning of the word, and if he could have permitted himself such a feeling he would have despised the idea. Hard man as he was, he had loved his son passionately, though he had never shown it; and he could think of no better way to prove it now than by a ferocious hatred for those who had killed him; not, of course, reckoning himself among the number.</p>
				<p>There were not many methods of revenge open to a man of his age, rheumatic and stiff in one arm; but he tried to enlist and was rejected. He felt that something must be done, and all that he had left was his brain. Alone in his deserted house with the memory of his dead wife and child, he sat for hours brooding on these vindictive thoughts; and like a beast shaking the bars of its cage, waiting for the chance to spring, his mind raged furiously against the inhibitions the war put upon him with its iron circle of the trenches.</p>
				<p>The clamours of the press drew his attention to Clerambault’s articles which were intensely distasteful to him. The idea of snatching his precious hatred away from between his teeth! From the slight acquaintance that he had with Clerambault before the war, he felt an antipathy for him; as a writer, on account of the new form of his art, and as a man for numerous reasons: his love of life, and other men, his democratic ideals, his rather silly optimism, and his European aspirations. At the very first glance, with the instinct of a rheumatic in mind and body, Vaucoux had classed Clerambault as one of those pestilent persons who open doors and windows and make a draught in that closed house, his Country. That is, as he understood the term, in his mind there could be no other. After this there was no need for the vociferations of the papers; in the author of “The Appeal to the Living,” and the “Pardon from the Dead,” he saw at once an agent of the enemy, and with his thirst for revenge, he knew the opportunity had come.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="part-5-11">
				<p>Nothing can be more convenient than to detest those who differ from you, especially when you do not understand them; but poor Clerambault had not this resource, for he did understand perfectly. These good people had had to bear injuries from the enemy; of course because they were struck by them, but also frankly, because of Injustice with a capital <i epub:type="z3998:grapheme">I</i>; for in their shortsightedness it filled the field of vision. The capacity to feel and judge is very limited in an ordinary man; submerged as he is in the species, he clings to any driftwood; and just as he reduces the infinite number of shades in the river of light to a few colours, the good and evil that flow in the veins of the world are only perceptible to him when he has bottled a few samples, chosen among those around him. All good and bad then he has in his flask, and on these he can expend his whole power of liking or repulsion; witness the fact that to millions of excellent people the condemnation of Dreyfus, or the sinking of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Lusitania</i>, remains the crime of the century. They cannot see that the path of social life is paved with crime, and that they walk over it in perfect unconsciousness, profiting by injustices that they make no effort to prevent. Of all these, which are the worst? Those which rouse long echoes in the conscience of mankind, or those which are known alone to the stifled victim? Naturally, our worthy friends have not arms long enough to embrace all the misery of the world; they can only reach one perhaps, but that they press close to their heart; and when they have chosen a crime, they pour out upon it all the pent-up hatred within them;⁠—when a dog has a bone to gnaw, it is wiser not to touch him.</p>
				<p>Clerambault had tried to take his bone away from the dog, and if he was bitten he had no right to complain; in point of fact he did not do so. Men are in the right to fight injustice wherever they see it; perhaps it is not their fault if they often see no more than its big toe, like Gulliver’s at Brobdignag. Well, we must each do what we can; and these people could bite.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="part-5-12">
				<p>It was Good Friday, and the rising tide of invasion swept up towards the Ile de France. Even this day of sacred sorrow had not stopped the massacre, for the lay war knows nothing of the Truce of God. Christ had been bombarded in one of His churches, and the news of the murderous explosion at <abbr>St.</abbr> Gervais that afternoon spread at nightfall through the darkened city, wrapped in its grief, its rage, and its fear.</p>
				<p>The sad little group of friends had gathered at Froment’s house; each one had come hoping to meet the others, without previous appointment. They could see nothing but violence all about them; in the present as well as in the future, in the enemy’s camp, in their own, on the side of revolutionists, and reactionaries as well. Their agony and their doubts met in one thought. The sculptor was saying:</p>
				<p>“Our holiest convictions, our faith in peace and human brotherhood rest in vain on reason and love; is there any hope then that they can conquer men? We are too weak.”</p>
				<p>Clerambault, half-unconsciously, as the words of Isaiah came to his mind, uttered them aloud:</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>“Darkness covers the earth,<br/>
					And the cloud envelops the people.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>He stopped, but from the faintly-lighted bed came Froment’s voice, continuing:</p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>“Rise, for on the tops of the mountains<br/>
					The light shineth forth.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>“Yes, the light will dawn,” said Madame Froment; she was sitting on the foot of the bed in the dark near Clerambault; he leaned forward and took her hand. It was as if a thrill widened through the room, like a ripple over water.</p>
				<p>“Why do you say that?” asked the Count de Coulanges.</p>
				<p>“Because I see <em>Him</em> plainly.”</p>
				<p>“I can see <em>Him</em> too,” said Clerambault.</p>
				<p>“Him? Whom do you mean?” asked Doctor Verrier. But before the answer could come, they all knew the word that would be said:</p>
				<p>“He who bears the light, the God who will conquer.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>“Are you waiting for a God?” said the old professor. “Do you believe in miracles?”</p>
				<p>“We are the miracle, for is it not one that in this world of perpetual violence we have kept a constant faith in the love and the union of men?”</p>
				<p>“Christ is expected for centuries,” said Coulanges bitterly, “and when He comes, He is neglected, crucified, and then forgotten except by a handful of poor ignorant wretches, good if you like, but narrow. The handful grows larger, and for the space of a man’s life, faith is in flower, but afterwards it is spoiled and betrayed by success, by ambitious disciples, by the Church; and so on for centuries⁠ ⁠… <i xml:lang="la">Adveniat regnum tuum</i>⁠ ⁠… Where is the kingdom of God?”</p>
				<p>“Within us,” said Clerambault, “our trials and our hopes all go to form the eternal Christ. It ought to make us happy to think of the privilege that has been bestowed on us, to shelter in our hearts the new God like the Babe in the manger.”</p>
				<p>“And what proof have we of His coming?” said the doctor.</p>
				<p>“Our existence,” said Clerambault.</p>
				<p>“Our sufferings,” said Froment.</p>
				<p>“Our misunderstood faith,” said the sculptor.</p>
				<p>“The fact alone that we are,” went on Clerambault. “We are a living paradox thrown in the face of nature which denies it. A hundred times must the flame be kindled and go out before it burns steadily. Every Christ, every God is tried in advance through a series of forerunners; they are everywhere, lost in space, lost in the ages; but though widely-separated, all of these lonely souls see the same luminous point on the horizon⁠—the glance of the Saviour⁠—who is coming.”</p>
				<p>“He is already come,” said Froment.</p>
				<p>When they separated, with a deep mutual feeling, but in silence⁠—for they feared to break the religious charm which held them⁠—each found himself alone in the dark street, but in each was the memory of a vision which they could hardly understand. The curtain had fallen; but they could never forget that they had seen it rise.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="part-5-13">
				<p>A few days after, Clerambault, who had been again summoned before the magistrate, came home splashed with mud from head to foot. His hat which he held in his hand, was a mere rag, and his hair was soaking. The woman, who opened the door, exclaimed at the sight of him, but he signed to her to keep still, and went into his room. Rosine was away, so the husband and wife were alone in the flat, where they only met at meals, saying as little to each other as possible. However, hearing the exclamation of the servant, Madame Clerambault feared some new misfortune and went to look for her husband. She too cried out when she saw him:</p>
				<p>“Good Lord! what have you been doing now?”</p>
				<p>“I slipped and fell,” said he, trying to wipe off the traces of the accident.</p>
				<p>“You fell?⁠—turn round. What a state you are in!⁠ ⁠… One can’t have a moment’s peace when you are around.⁠ ⁠… You never look where you are going. There is mud up to your eyelids⁠ ⁠… all over your face!”</p>
				<p>“Yes, I must have struck myself there.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>“What unlucky people we are!⁠ ⁠… you ‘think’ that you struck your cheek?⁠ ⁠… you tripped and fell?⁠ ⁠…” And looking him in the face, she cried:</p>
				<p>“It isn’t true!⁠ ⁠…</p>
				<p>“I did fall, I assure you.⁠ ⁠…”</p>
				<p>“No, I know it is not true⁠ ⁠… tell me,⁠ ⁠… someone struck you⁠ ⁠… ?” He did not answer. “They struck you, the brutes. My poor husband, to think that anyone should strike you!⁠ ⁠… And you so good, who never did harm to anyone in your life! How can people be so wicked?” and she burst into tears as she threw her arms around him.</p>
				<p>“My dear girl,” said he, much touched. “It is not worth all these tears. See, you are getting all muddy, you ought not to touch me.”</p>
				<p>“That does not matter,” said she. “I have more spots than that on my conscience. Forgive me!”</p>
				<p>“Forgive you for what? Why do you say such things?”</p>
				<p>“Because I have been wicked to you myself; I haven’t understood you⁠—(I don’t think I ever shall)⁠—but I do know that whatever you do, you only mean what is right. I ought to have stood up for you and I have not done it. I was angry with your foolishness, but it is really I that was the fool, and it vexed me too, when you got everyone down on you. But now⁠ ⁠… it is really too unjust! That a lot of men who are not fit to tie your shoe⁠ ⁠… that they should strike you! Let me kiss your poor muddy face!”</p>
				<p>It was so sweet to find each other again!⁠—When she had had a good cry on Clerambault’s neck, she helped him to dress, then she bathed his cheek with arnica, and carried off his clothes to brush them. At table her eyes dwelt on him with the old affectionate care, while he tried to calm her fears by talking of familiar things. To be alone together without the children took them back to the old days, the early times of their marriage. And the memory had a sad, quiet sweetness⁠—as the evening Angelus spreads through the growing gloom a last softened glory from the Angelus of noon.</p>
				<p>About ten o’clock the bell rang, and Moreau came in with his friend Gillot. They had read the evening papers which gave an account of the incident⁠—from their point of view; some spoke of the “spontaneous” indignation of the crowd and approved of the rebuke inflicted by popular contempt. Others, and they were the more serious sheets, deprecated lynch law in the public streets, as a matter of principle, but blamed the weakness of the authorities, who were afraid to throw light on all the facts.</p>
				<p>It was not impossible that this mild criticism of the government was inspired by the government itself; for politicians know how to manage so that their hand may be forced, when they have an end in view of which they are not exactly proud. The arrest of Clerambault seemed imminent, and Moreau and his comrade were very uneasy; but Clerambault signed to them to say nothing before his wife, and after a few words on the event of the day, which they treated rather lightly, he took them both into his study and asked them to tell him plainly what was the matter.</p>
				<p>They showed him a vicious article in the nationalist paper which had been active against Clerambault for weeks, and which was so encouraged by the manifestation of the day that it called on all its friends to renew the attack the next morning. Moreau and Gillot foresaw that there would be trouble when Clerambault went to the Palais, and they had come to beg him to stay in the house. Knowing his timidity, they thought that there would be no difficulty in persuading him to this, but just as it had been the day Moreau had found him disputing in the street, he did not now seem to grasp the situation.</p>
				<p>“Stay at home, why? I am perfectly well.”</p>
				<p>“We think it would be more prudent.”</p>
				<p>“On the contrary, it would do me good to go out for a little while.”</p>
				<p>“You don’t know what might happen.”</p>
				<p>“As to that one never knows; it will be time enough to worry when it comes.”</p>
				<p>“To be perfectly frank then, you are in danger; the feeling has been worked up against you for a long time, till now you are so hated that people’s eyes almost start out of their heads at the sound of your name;⁠—idiots! they know nothing about you but what they see in the papers; but their leaders want a row, they have been so stupid that your articles have had much more publicity than they intended; they are afraid that your ideas will spread, and they want to make an example of you that will discourage anyone who might be disposed to follow you.”</p>
				<p>“If that is true,” said Clerambault, “and I really have followers⁠—something I did not know before⁠—this is not the moment to keep out of the way; if they want to make an example of me, I cannot balk them.” This was said in so pleasant a way, that they asked themselves if he really understood.</p>
				<p>“You are taking a terrible risk,” persisted Gillot.</p>
				<p>“Well, my friend, everyone has to take risks nowadays.”</p>
				<p>“It ought, at least, to be of some use⁠—why play into their hands? There is no need to throw yourself into the jaws of the wolves.”</p>
				<p>“It seems to me on the contrary, that it might be very useful,” said Clerambault, “and that the wolf would find himself in the wrong box after all; let me explain to you. This will spread our ideas, for violence always consecrates the persecuted cause. They want to intimidate, and so they will. Everyone will be frightened⁠—their own side, all the hesitaters, and timorous folk. Let them be unjust, it will rebound on their own heads.” He seemed to forget that it might also fall on his.</p>
				<p>They saw that he had made up his mind, and felt an increased respect for him, but they also felt much more anxious, and this led them to say:</p>
				<p>“If that is the case, we will get all our friends together, and go with you.”</p>
				<p>“No, no, what a ridiculous idea!⁠ ⁠… nothing will happen after all.” Seeing that their remonstrances were useless, Moreau made a last attempt: “You can’t keep me from coming with you,” said he. “I am an obstinate man myself, you can’t get rid of me; I will wait for you, if I have to sit on that bench outside your door all night!”</p>
				<p>“Go and spend the night in your bed, my dear fellow,” said Clerambault, “and sleep soundly. Come with me in the morning if you like, but it will be time lost; nothing is going to happen;⁠—but kiss me, all the same!” After an affectionate hug, they went towards the door, when Gillot paused a moment: “We must look after you a little, you know,” said he, “we feel as if you were a sort of father to us.”</p>
				<p>“So I am,” said Clerambault with his beaming smile; his own boy was in his mind. He closed the door, and stood for some minutes with the lamp in his hand in the vestibule before he realised where he was. It was nearly midnight and he was very tired, but, instead of going into the bedroom, he mechanically turned again towards his study;⁠—the apartment, the house, the street were all asleep. Almost without seeing it, he stared vaguely at the light shining on the frame of an engraving of Rembrandt’s, <i epub:type="se:name.visual-art.painting">The Resurrection of Lazarus</i>, which hung on the opposite wall.⁠ ⁠… A dear figure seemed to enter the room;⁠ ⁠… it came in silently, and stood beside him.</p>
				<p>“Are you satisfied now?” he thought. “Is this what you wished?” And Maxime answered: “Yes,” then added with meaning:</p>
				<p>“I have found it very hard to teach you, Papa.”</p>
				<p>“Yes,” said Clerambault, “there is much that we can learn from our sons.” And they smiled at each other in the silence.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="part-5-14">
				<p>When Clerambault at last went to bed, his wife was sound asleep. She was one of those people whom nothing can keep awake, who sink into profound slumber as soon as their heads touch the pillow. But Clerambault could not follow her example; he lay on his back with his eyes open, staring into the darkness, all through the rest of the night.</p>
				<p>There were pale glimmers from the street in the half-shadow; and a quiet star or two high up in a dark sky; one seemed to be falling in a great half-circle⁠—it was only an airplane keeping watch over the sleeping city. Clerambault followed its sweep with his eyes, and seemed, to fly with it, the distant hum of the human planet coming faintly to his ear, like a strange music of the spheres not foreseen by Ionian sages.</p>
				<p>He felt happy, for the burden was lifted from his body and soul, his whole being seemed to be relaxed, to float in air. Pictures of the past day with its agitations and fatigues, passed before his eyes, but did not disturb him. An old man hustled by a mob of young bourgeois⁠ ⁠… He could hear their loud voices, too loud⁠—but now they had vanished like faces that you catch a glimpse of from a moving train. The train flies on and the vision disappears in the roaring tunnel.⁠ ⁠… There is the sombre sky again, and the mysterious star, still falling. Silent spaces around, the clear darkness, and the cool fresh air blowing on his soul; all infinity in one tiny drop of life, in a heart whose spark flickers to its end, but knows it is free, and that its vast home is near.</p>
				<p>Like a good steward of the treasure placed in his charge, Clerambault made up the account of his day. He looked back on his attempts, his efforts, his impulses, his mistakes; how little remained of his life, for nearly all that he had built up he had afterwards destroyed with his own hands. He had first stated, then denied, and had never ceased to wander in the forest of doubts and contradictions; often torn and bruised, with no guide but the stars half-seen through the branches. What meaning had there been in this long troubled course, now ending in darkness? One only, he had been free.</p>
				<p>Free!⁠ ⁠… What was this freedom, then, which intoxicated him so completely? This liberty of which he was the master and the slave⁠—this imperious need to be free? He knew well enough that no more than others was he emancipated from the eternal bonds; but the orders that he obeyed differed from others; all are not alike. The word liberty is only one of the clear high commands of the invisible sovereign who rules the world⁠ ⁠… whom we call necessity. She it is who excites those of the advance-guard to rebel, and causes them to break with the heavy past which the blind multitude drags along behind it; for she is the battlefield of the eternal present, where the past and the future must ever strive together, and on this field the ancient laws are conquered, that they may give place to new laws, which will be conquered in their turn.</p>
				<p>O Liberty! Thou art always in chains, but they are not the heavy fetters of the past; for each struggle has enlarged thy prison. Who can tell? Perhaps later, when the prison walls have been thrown down.⁠ ⁠… But in the meanwhile, those whom thou wouldst save resist thee. Thou art called the Public Enemy, or The One against All. To think that this nickname should have been fastened on the weak, ordinary Clerambault! But he did not remember that at this moment, his thoughts were filled with the one who has always existed, ever since man has been known on the earth; the one who has never ceased to fight their follies, that they may be delivered⁠—<em>The One whom All oppose</em>.⁠ ⁠… How many times throughout the ages have they rejected and crushed him! But in the midst of his agony a supernatural joy sustains him; he is the sacred golden seed of liberty, which fell from we know not what sheaf, and in the darkness of destiny has sowed the germs of light, ever since the first chaos. In the depths of the savage heart of man, the frail atom found shelter, it fought against elementary laws which grind and bend living things; but tirelessly the small golden seed grew, and man the weakest of all creatures, marched against nature and fought her. Each step cost a drop of his blood, in this gigantic duel; he has had to fight nature not only in the world without, but within himself, since he is a part of her. This is the hardest battle, that waged by the man divided against himself; and in the end who will conquer? On the one side is nature with her chariot of iron, in which she hurls worlds and peoples into the abyss; and on the other is only⁠—The Word. It is no wonder that you laugh, ye slaves! no wonder the servants of force say that it is like “a cur barking at the wheels of an express-train.” Yes, if man were only a fragment of matter writhing in vain beneath the hammer of fate; but there is a spirit within him which knows how to smite Achilles on his heel, and Goliath in his forehead. Let him but wrench off a nut, the swift train is overturned, its course stayed. Planetary swirls, obscure masses of humankind, roll down through the ages lighted by flashes of the liberating Spirit: Buddha, the Sages, Jesus⁠—all breakers of chains! I can see the lightning coming, feel it thrill through me, like sparks that fly up beneath the horse’s hoofs. The air vibrates with it, as the thick clouds of hate come together with a crash. The flame springs up! If you are alone against the world, have you cause to complain? You have escaped the crushing yoke, fought your way through, like a nightmare in which one struggles and tears oneself out of the dark waters. You sink, choking, and all at once with a despairing effort you throw yourself beyond the reach of the wave, and sink exhausted but safe on the shore. These people wound me? So much the better, I shall wake up in the free air.</p>
				<p>Yes, threatening world, I am indeed free from your fetters, I can never be chained again, and my detested will with which I so often had to fight, my will is now in you. You wanted, like me, to be free, and that made you suffer, and made you my enemy; but now even if you kill me, you have seen the light in me, and once seen, you can no longer reject it. Strike then! But know that in fighting against me you fight yourself also; you are beaten in advance, and when I defend myself, it is you that I defend as well. <em>The One against All</em> is the <em>One for All</em>, and soon will be <em>The One with All</em>.</p>
				<p>I shall no longer be solitary! I feel that I have never been in truth alone. My brothers of the world, you may indeed be scattered afar over the earth like a handful of grain, but I know that you are here beside me. The thought of a man is not solitary; the idea which grows in him springs up in others; when he feels it in his heart, let him rejoice, no matter how unhappy, how injured he may be, for it is the earth reviving. The first spark in a lonely soul is the point of the ray which will pierre the night. So, welcome, Light. Break through the night which is around and within me!⁠ ⁠… “Clerambault.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="part-5-15">
				<p>The fresh light of day returned, ever young and new, untouched by the stains of men which the sun drinks up like a morning mist.</p>
				<p>Madame Clerambault woke, and when she saw her husband with open eyes, she thought that he too had just waked up.</p>
				<p>“You had a good sleep,” said she. “I don’t think you stirred all night long.” He did not contradict her, but thought of the vast distances he had traversed in the spirit, that fiery bird that flies through the night.⁠ ⁠… But feeling that he had come back to earth, he got up.</p>
				<p>At the same hour another man rose, who had also passed a sleepless night, who had also evoked his dead son, and thought of Clerambault, whom he did not know, with fierce hatred.</p>
				<p>A letter came from Rosine by the first mail, containing a secret that Clerambault had guessed long ago. Daniel had spoken to his parents, and the marriage would take place the next time he came home from the front. She went through the form of asking the consent of her father and mother, but she knew that her wishes were theirs. Her letter radiated happiness and a triumphant security that nothing could shake. The sad riddle of the agonised world had found an answer, and in the absorption of her young love the universal suffering; did not seem too high a price for the flower that bloomed for her on this bloody stem. In the midst of it all, she was tender and compassionate as usual, remembering the troubles of others, her father and his worries. But she seemed to put her happy arms about them, with a simple affectionate conceit, as if she said: “Please don’t worry any more over all these ideas, darlings! It is foolish of you to be sad, when you see that happiness is coming.”</p>
				<p>Clerambault smiled tenderly as he read the letter. No doubt happiness was on the way, but some of us cannot wait for it. “Greet it from me, my little Rose, and do not let it fly away.”</p>
				<p>About eleven o’clock the Count de Coulanges came to ask after him; he had seen Moreau and Gillot mounting guard before the door. They had come to escort Clerambault according to their promise, but they had not dared to come up because they were an hour too early. Clerambault sent for them, laughing at their excess of zeal, and they admitted that they had thought him perfectly capable of sneaking out of the house without waiting for them; an idea which he confessed had crossed his mind.</p>
				<p>The news from the front was good; during the last few days the German offensive had wavered; strange signs of weakness began to appear; and well-founded rumours made it evident that there was a secret disorganisation in the formidable mass. People said that the limit of his strength had been passed and that the athlete was exhausted. There was talk also of contagion from the Russian revolutionary spirit brought by the German troops that had been on the Eastern Front.</p>
				<p>With the usual mobility of the French mind, the pessimists of yesterday began to shout for the approaching victory. Already Moreau discounted the calming down of passions and the return to common sense. The reconciliation of the nations and the triumph of Clerambault’s ideas would follow shortly. He advised them not to deceive themselves too much, and amused himself by describing what would happen when peace was signed; for peace would have to come some day.</p>
				<p>“I am going to pretend,” said he, “that I am hovering over the town⁠—like the devil on two sticks⁠—the first night after the armistice. I see innumerable sorrowing hearts behind shutters closed against the shouts in the streets. Hearts straining all through these years towards a victory that would lend meaning to their grief; and now they can let go⁠—or break down, sleep, die, perhaps. The politicians will reflect on the quickest and most lucrative way to exploit the success, or turn a somersault if they have guessed wrong. The professional soldiers will keep the war going as long as they can, and when that is stopped, they will plan for another in the shortest possible time. Before-the-war pacifists will all come out of their holes, and be found at their posts, with touching demonstrations of joy, while their old leaders who have been beating the drum in the rear for over five years will reappear with olive branches in their hands, smiling and talking of brotherly love. The men who swore never to forget when they were in the trenches will accept all the explanations and congratulations that are offered them. It is such a bore not to forget! Five years of exhausting fatigue make you accept anything through sheer weariness or boredom, or the wish to finish it all, so the flourishes of triumph will drown the cries of the vanquished. The one thought of most people will be to go back to their sleepy before-the-war habits; first they will dance on the graves, and then lie down and go to sleep on them, till after a while the war will be only something to boast about in the evening. Perhaps they will succeed in forgetting it so entirely, that the Dance of Death can be resumed;⁠—not all at once, of course, but later when we have had a good rest. So there will be peace everywhere, till the time when it will be war everywhere again. In the meaning that is now given to the words, my friends, peace and war are just different labels for the same bottle. It reminds me of what King Bomba said of his valiant soldiers; dress them in red or in green as you choose, they will take to their heels just the same. One says peace and the other war, but neither means anything, there is only universal servitude, multitudes swept along like the ebb and flow of tides; and this will continue as long as no strong souls raise themselves above the human ocean, as long as no one dares to fight against the fate that sways these great masses.”</p>
				<p>“Fight against nature,” said Coulanges. “Would you resist her laws?”</p>
				<p>“There are no immutable laws,” said Clerambault, “laws like beings, live, change, and die. It is the duty of the spirit, not to accept these as the Stoics taught us, but rather to modify and shape them to our needs. Laws are the outside form of the soul, and if it grows they must grow also. The only just laws are those that suit me. Am I wrong in thinking that the shoe should be made to fit the foot, not the foot for the shoe?”</p>
				<p>“I do not say that you are wrong,” said the Count, “we force nature all the time in cattle-breeding, so that even the shape and instincts of the animals are modified; why not the human creature? No, far from blaming you, I maintain on the contrary that the object and the duty of every man worthy of the name is, just as you say, to alter human nature. It is the source of all real progress; even to strive after the impossible has a concrete value. But that does not mean that we shall succeed in what we undertake.”</p>
				<p>“It is possible that we may not succeed for ourselves and our children; it is, even more, probable. Perhaps our unhappy nation, the entire West is on the downward path. There are many things that make me fear that we are hastening to our fall; our vices and our virtues, which are almost equally injurious, the pride and hatred, the jealous spite worthy of a big village, the endless chain of revenges, the blind obstinacy, the clinging to the past with its superannuated conceptions of honour and duty, which causes us to sacrifice the future for the past; all these make me fear that the terrible warning of this war has taught nothing to our slothful and turbulent heroism. There was a time when I should have been overwhelmed by such a thought as this, but now I feel lifted above it, as I am above my own mortal body; the only tie between me and it is made of pity. My spirit is brother to that which, on the other side of the globe, is now touched by the new fire. Do you remember the beautiful words of the Seer of <abbr>St.</abbr> Jean d’Acre?”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4" id="noteref-4" epub:type="noteref">4</a></p>
				<blockquote>
					<p>“ ‘The Sun of Truth is like our sun. It rises in many different places. One day it appears in the sign of Cancer, on another it rises in Libra, but it is always the same sun. Once the Sun of Truth rose in the constellation of Abraham, and set in that of Moses, flaming over the whole horizon; and later it was seen in the sign of Christ, bright and resplendent. When its light shone over Sinai, the followers of Abraham were blinded. But wherever the sun may rise, my eyes will be fixed upon it; even if it should appear in the west it will always be the sun.’ ”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>“ ‘<i xml:lang="fr">C’est du Nord aujourd’hui que nous vient la lumière</i>,’ ”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-5" id="noteref-5" epub:type="noteref">5</a> said Moreau, laughing (“It is from the North that our light comes today”).</p>
			</section>
			<section id="part-5-16">
				<p>Though the hearing was set for one o’clock, and it was now barely twelve, Clerambault wanted to start at once, he was so afraid of being late.</p>
				<p>They had not far to go, and indeed his friends had no need to protect him against the rabble which hung about the Palais de Justice, a crowd which in any case was considerably thinned out by the morning’s news. There were only a few curs, more noisy than dangerous, who might have snapped at their heels.</p>
				<p>They had reached the corner of the Rue Vaugirard and the Rue d’Assas, when Clerambault, finding that he had forgotten an important paper, went back to look for it in his apartment; the others stood there waiting for him. They saw him come out and cross the street. On the opposite sidewalk, near a cabstand, was a well-dressed man of about his own age, grey-haired, not very tall, and rather stout. They saw this person go up to Clerambault⁠—it all passed so quickly that they had no time even to cry out. There was a brief exchange of words, an arm raised, a shot!⁠—they saw him totter, and ran up. Too late.</p>
				<p>They laid him down on a bench; a little crowd gathered, more curious than shocked (people had seen so many things of this kind), looking over each ether’s shoulders:</p>
				<p>“Who is it?”</p>
				<p>“A defeatist.”</p>
				<p>“Serve him right, then! The dirty beasts have done us harm enough!”</p>
				<p>“I don’t know, there are worse things than to want the war to be over.”</p>
				<p>“There is only one way to finish it; we must fight it out. It is the pacifists’ fault that it has dragged on so long.”</p>
				<p>“You might almost say that they were the cause of it; the Boches counted on them. Without those fools there wouldn’t have been any war.” Clerambault lying there half-unconscious, thought of the old woman who threw her fagot on the wood stacked around John Huss⁠ ⁠… <i xml:lang="la">Sancta simplicitas.</i></p>
				<p>Vaucoux had not attempted to get away, but let them take the revolver out of his hand without resistance. They held his arms fast, and he stood looking at his victim, whose eyes met his; each thought of his son.</p>
				<p>Moreau, much excited, spoke threateningly to Vaucoux; who, like an impassive image of hatred, only answered briefly: “I have killed the Adversary, the Enemy.”</p>
				<p>A faint smile hovered on Clerambault’s lips as he looked at Vaucoux. “My poor friend,” he thought, “It is within you yourself that the Enemy lies,”⁠—his eyes closed⁠ ⁠… centuries seemed to pass.⁠ ⁠… “There are no enemies.⁠ ⁠…” and Clerambault entered into the peace of the worlds to come.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="part-5-17">
				<p>Seeing that he had lost consciousness, his friends carried him into Froment’s house which was close by; but he was dead before they reached it.</p>
				<p>They laid him on a bed, in a room beside that in which the young paralytic lay with his friends now gathered round him. The door remained open. The spirit of the dead man seemed near them.</p>
				<p>Moreau spoke bitterly of the absurdity of this murder; why not strike one of the great pirates of the triumphant reaction, or a recognised head of the revolutionary group? Why choose this inoffensive, unbiased man, who was kind to everyone, and almost too comprehending to all sides?</p>
				<p>“Hatred makes no mistakes,” said Edmé Froment. “It has been guided by a sure instinct to the right mark; for an enemy often sees more clearly than a friend. No, there is no doubt about it, the most dangerous adversary of society and the established order in this world of violence, falsehood, and base compromises, is, and has always been, the man of peace and a free conscience. The crucifixion of Jesus was no accident; He had to be put to death. He would be executed today; for a great evangelist is a revolutionary, and the most radical of all. He is the inaccessible source from whence revolutions break through the hard ground, the eternal principle of non-submission of the spirit to Caesar, no matter who he may be⁠—the unjust force. This explains the hatred of those servants of the State, the domesticated peoples, for the insulted Christ who looks at them in silence, and also for His disciples, for us, the eternal insurrectionists, the conscientious objectors to tyranny from high or low, to that of today or tomorrow⁠ ⁠… for us, who go before One greater than ourselves, who comes bringing to the world the Word of salvation, the Master laid in the grave but ‘<i xml:lang="fr">qui sera en agonie jusqu’ à la fin du monde</i>,’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-6" id="noteref-6" epub:type="noteref">6</a> whose suffering will endure to the world’s end, the unfettered Spirit, the Lord of all.”</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
